
===== PAGE 1 =====
Level 1Site Assessment Prepared for: Sarah and Jonathan Graham Site: 370 Ortega Ridge Road Santa Barbara, CA 93108 Site Visit Date(s): 4/18/2022 Prepared by: 7 th Generation Design Casey Pfeifer | 805-680-2976Wes Cooke | 805-234-6124 www.7thgenerationdesign.com

===== PAGE 2 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road Table of ContentsExecutive Summary 5 Report Organization 7 1. Site Work Up 10 1.1 General Site Information 10 1.2 Topography 11 1.3 Temperature 13 Average and Record High and Low Temperatures 13 Chilling Hours 14 Climate Zones 16 USDA Hardiness Zone 16 Sunset Climate Zone(s) 16 Koppen Geiger Climate Classification 17 1.4 Environmental Sectors (Water, Solar, Wind) 17 Water Data 20 Annual Precipitation Totals 20 Annual Distribution of Precipitation 21 Rainfall Intensity and Recurrence Interval 22 Humidity 22 Fog 23 Aquifer 23 Evapotranspiration 25 Climate Brittleness 25 Solar Data 26 Wind Data 28 1.5 Existing Soil and Vegetation Conditions 31 Soil Condition Summary 31 17 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 6 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road Executive Summary7th Generation Design wasinvitedbySarahandJonathanGrahamtoconduct asiteassessment ofthe 84 acre property located at 370 Ortega Ridge Road in Montecito, CA. The Grahamfamilyhascommunicatedadesiretorehabilitateadegradedplotoflandanddevelopregenerativeland-basedsystems that are supported by the climate, with the following major goals: ● improving the health of the land,● carbon capture (or other positive environmental impact),● a beautiful setting to relocate to in 5-10 years, and● development of land-based income. The predominant land and climate features at 370 Ortega Ridge Road include: ● Asecondaryridge, extendingfromthespineoftheprimaryridge(whichOrtegaRidgeRoadbordering the property to the NWfollows) nearlytotheprimaryvalleyat itstoealongitslengthinaNWxSEdirection andspanningthetwosecondaryvalleysthatdefinetheridgeacrossitswidth(Greenwell Ave, whichborderstheproperty, followsthewesternsecondaryvalley bottom).● Temperatureswithtypical highsbetween60-80 ℉andlowsthatonlyveryrarelydropbelowfreezing, with an average of 300-500 chilling hours (<45 ℉ ) per year.● Averagerainfall of 17.73inchesper year, withapproximately40.44milliongallonsofwaterlanding on the property per average rain year.● Highsolar exposure, withanaveragesolarinsolationlevelof6.1kWh/m 2 /day(comparedtothat of Death Valley, CA at 6.4 kWh/m2/day, and Fairbanks, AK at 3.1 kWh/m2/day).● Monthly average winds that range from 5 to 8 mph, blowing predominantly fromthesouthwest during the spring and summer and from the northeast during the fall and winter.● Clay and clay-loam soils with moderate to high fragility, low to moderate permeability,moderate to rapid runoff potential, and 30-50” effective rooting depth. The property has fairly fertile soils, a warmclimate, good sun exposure, and generally low tomoderate slopes. While the property at 370 Ortega Ridge Road has immense potential for theGraham family’s goals to be realized, there are some issues that will pose significant ongoingchallenges to meeting these goals unless they are rectified. These issues include: ● Relatively high water requirements of existing food production systems. The waterrequirements for the existing foodproductionsystemsareinthetensof millionof gallonsannually, which is sourced from Montecito Water District and currently billed in theagricultural tier at $0.00760/gal, withcostsrisingtorisingto$.00778/galbeginningonJuly1, 2022. Thefuturereliabilityandcostsof MontecitoWater District’ssupplyareunknown,and the site currently lacks private access to water in the form of a spring or well.● Severe andactiveerosion. Of the40milliongallonsof water that landsonandrunsontothe property during an average rain year, an estimated 8-20 million gallons (20-50%) iscurrentlylost asrunoff. Accesspatterningthat haschangedthelandtopologysuchthatthe 57 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 7 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road run-offfromlargeareasisconcentratedbytheorchardaccessroadsandfunneledtospecificlocations. Thisconcentrationandfunnelingincreasesthewater energyandthusitserosivepower. Beyondtheerosion, iftheamountofwaterthatiscurrentlyleavingthepropertywasto be purchased fromtheMontecitoWater District, it wouldequateto$60,000- $150,000worth of water annually.● Lack of perennial vegetativecoverwithintheorchardplantings, whichposesseveralissues:o Lack of vegetative cover is significantly contributing to the erosion issues notedabove, which guarantees decreasing soil fertility with each passing year.o Soil compaction duetolossof soil structure, andthusdecreasingwater infiltrationandwater storagecapacity. Theporespacesthat arecreatedinahealthy, livingsoilfromplant roots, theexudatestheyproduce, andthesoilbiologytheyhelptoprotectand sustain are diminished or gone entirely in some places.o Increasing water requirementsduetohighsoil temperaturesandhighevaporationrates. Livingroot massisthemost effectivemeansof infiltratingwater intothesoilwhere it can be productively usedbyplant rootsandsoil biota. Vegetativecover isthe most effective means to cool soil temperatures and lower evaporative losses.● Largemonocropproductionlackingtheotherlayersthatwouldbefoundinahealthy,balanced ecosystem. The monocropped nature of these systems results in increasedsusceptibility to disease and other increasingly extreme environmental conditions.Fluctuations in market demand year-to-year create unpredictable income fromthe maincropyields. Inputscostsarehighandsteadilyrisingyear-over-year duetothedependencyof the systemon external inputs (water, fertilizer, persistent herbicides for weed control,insecticidal sprays for pest control).● Salt build upinthesoils. Numerouslargesalt crustsareevident at seepsitesandwithinirrigation footprints for individual trees. Thissalt buildupispart of what iscollapsingthesoil structure, decreasingitswater holdingcapacity, anddecreasingitsabilitytosupport ahealthy array of soil life. Thelackof water retentionduringrainslimitstheflushingof thesalts that would otherwise occur. Saltingisacommonandimminentlypressingissuewithcrop irrigation as it is currently practiced, especially with high-mineral content water inhigh-evaporation climates. Of theinitial considerationsfor rectifyingtheseissuesthatarepresentedinthisreport, allofwhichshould beinvestigatedfurther aspart of adetailedwholesitedesignprocess, thehighest leverageones that have been identified are: ● Installationof passivewaterharvestingearthworksinassociationwithre-contouringand re-patterning of the mainframe orchard access roads. Throughtheuseof passivewater harvesting elements such asinfiltrationbasins, swales, andboomerangsat strategicpoints and the integration of planned and armored drainage points fromre-patternedaccessroutesandoverflowspillways, theestimated8-20milliongallonsoferosivesurfacerunoff shed by the propertyduringanaveragerainyear canbespreadout alongthedrier 67 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 8 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road ridges and infiltrated into the soils. This in itself will likely halt the progression of manyexisting erosion sites, as the significantly-reduced amount of runoff remaining will belargely bypassing many areas.● Establishingcoveroverall baresoilsbylayeringinthemissinglayersof afunctionalforest ecosystem within existing orchards to be kept in production. Assuming thelemons and avocados represent the overstory, adding in understories of low-growing orcoppiced nitrogen-fixing shrubs and trees, herbaceous and groundcover layers, andintegratingvininglayerswhereappropriatewill helptoprovidefertilitywhereitisneeded,protect soilsfromthesunanddirect raindropimpact, increasehabitatforbeneficialinsectsand create a more diverse and resilient soil life community. The eventual integration oflivestockfor soil-buildingandvegetationmanagement will result inafully-functioningandhealthy ecosystem. Report OrganizationThis report is largely organized according totheKeylineScaleof Permanence, presentedinorderfromthings human beings are least able to change down to those things that we have greateragency with. Climate and Geography > Water> Access > Shelter>LivingSystems>Boundaries>Energy>Economy Eachof themainchaptersof thereport beginswithacontextualsummaryandgeneraloverviewofthetopicat hand(i.e. Water) andthegeneralprinciplesemployedinitsdesignandimplementationwhen creating resilient and regenerative systems (i.e. Principles of Regenerative Hydrology,Hydrological Cycle Overviewetc). Eachchapter isthenbrokenout intosectionswhicharedefinedbyfunction(i.e. ProvidingHydration, MovingThings, ModeratingClimate, ProvidingRe-Creationinthe case of Water). Each of these chapter sections then details existing site conditions and listsspecific element recommendations (i.e. swales, infiltration basins etc) designed to serve thatprimary function, with links to other report sections detailing additional functions (i.e. treeestablishment) performed by that element. 77 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 30 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road Figure 1.4.8Daily average wind speed recorded at a station located 1.8 miles away from 370 Ortega Ridge near San YsidroCanyon in Montecito. Awindroseshowingthespeed, direction, anddistributionofhourlywinddatafor2020recordedata station located 1.8 miles away from370 Ortega Ridge near San Ysidro Canyon in Montecito isshown in Figure 1.4.9. The prevailing wind directions are from the northeast and southwest. 297 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 31 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road Figure 1.4.9Windrose for a station located 1.8 miles away from370 Ortega Ridge near San Ysidro Canyon in Montecito. 14 Theprevailingwindblowsonshorefromthesouthwest, overtheoceanandtowardstheSantaLuciarange. Theseprevailingwindsaremostpresentduringthespringandsummermonths. Falldaysseefrequent warmer offshore wind events from the northeast. Winter sees a mix of onshore andoffshore winds during clear days and winds from south to north during the passage of storms. As with the other climatic sectors, wind speeds and directionscanvarysignificantlyover asmallarea, even on the same property. The information above is a good approximation of the windconditionsat 370OrtegaRidgeRoadtouseasastartingpoint for plantings, windbreaksiting, etc;however, on-site observation- simply walking around throughout the year, noting wind directionand relative strength at different locations - will provide more refined information. Ifcapital-intensive projects that areheavilyinfluencedbythewindsector areever considered(suchas wind turbines), a detailed study should certainly be performed on-site. 14 https://wrcc.dri.edu/cgi-bin/rawMAIN.pl?caCMN2 307 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 32 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road 1.5 Existing Soil and Vegetation Conditions Soil Condition SummaryFertile soil is the foundation for a healthy landscape. Soil data provides information for thelandowner onwhat actionswill berequiredtofacilitatehealthydevelopmentofthelandscape. Thisinformation can be used to determine the best methods to organically build soil to optimal levels. The soil textureclassificationtriangleisshowninFigure1.5.1, depictingthedifferent proportionsthat occur betweenthethreemainparticlesthatcomprisesoil:sand, silt, andclay. Thepercentagesof each of these result in soil classifications such as “loam”, “sandy loam”, etc. Figure 1.5.1Soil texture classification triangle. TheNatural ResourcesConservationService(NRCS) mapfor 370OrtegaRidgeRoadisprovidedinFigure 1.5.2. Detailed descriptions of the soil classifications shown on the map follow. 317 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 33 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road Figure 1.5.2NRCS Web Soil Survey Data for 370 Ortega Ridge Roadand surrounding areas. 327 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 34 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road Table 1.5.1Summary of soil types for 370 Ortega RidgeSoilSeries SoilType DefiningSlope PropertyArea Key Characteristics Todos TbE2 15-30% 31% ● Predominant soil texture: Clay-loam● Depth to shale or mudstone <45”● Medium runoff● Moderate erosion hazard● Effective rooting depth 40-60” Diablo DaD 9-15% 26% ● Predominant soil texture: clay● Depth to shale or mudstone <50”● Medium runoff● Moderate erosion hazard● Effective rooting depth 45-60” DaE2 15-30% 17% ● Predominant soil texture:clay● Depth to shale or mudstone <40-45”● Rapid runoff● High erosion hazard● Effective rooting depth 40-55” DaF2 30-50% 12% ● Predominant soil texture: clay● Depth to shale or mudstone <35-45”● Rapid runoff● High erosion hazard● Effective rooting depth 40-50” Zaca ZaD2 9-15% 2% ● Predominant soil texture: clay● Depth to shale or mudstone <30”● Medium runoff● Moderate erosion hazard● Effective rooting depth 40-50” ZaE2 15-30% 11% ● Predominant soil texture: clay● Depth to shale or mudstone <20”● Rapid runoff● High erosion hazard● Effective rooting depth 40-55” All NRCS soil layer data indicates that the predominant soil types present on-property containsignificant amountsof clayandarepronetoexpansionandshrinkagewithannualprecipitationandsoil hydrationcycles, areeither fragileor moderatelyfragile, meaningtheyarequitesusceptibletoerosion and loss of pore space via compaction, and have low to moderate permeability. 337 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 35 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road Amajorityof theacreageinorchardproductionat370OrtegaRidgeRoad isactivelyeroding, someareasmoreseverelyandacutelythanothers. Theerosionconditionsarediscussedfurtherinsection2.2 - Moving Things. A written summary information on each soil type is provided below, and further detailedinformation can be found in theNRCS Santa BarbaraCounty Soils Report . 15 Todos clay loam soilsApproximately one-third of the property (the upper portion of the ridge) is dominated byTodosclayloam(TbE2), formedinweatheredsandstoneandshalebedrock. Inarepresentativeprofilethesurfacelayer isdarkreddishbrownclayloamabout 18inchesthick. Thesubsoil isduskyredanddark reddishbrownabout 26inchesthick. Thesubstratumisreddishbrownhighlyfracturedsoftshale. Thesesoilsaretypicallyneutralorslightlyacidic. Runoffismedium, permeabilityisslow, andthe hazard of erosion is moderate. Gullies and rills are common in most areas as a result ofcultivation. Available water capacity is 6 to 10 inches. Effective rooting depth is 40 to 60 inches. Todosclay-loamsoilsarewell-suitedfor thecultivationof fruit andnuttrees, perennialgrassesforgrazing livestock, or most ideally, agroforestry systems that combine both. Diablo clay soilsA little over a half of the property (the lower portion of the ridge) is dominated by Diablo clay,formed in soft shale and mudstone. Inarepresentativeprofile, thesurfacelayer isverydarkgrayclay about 37 inches thick. The next layer ismixedverydarkgrayandlight yellowish-brownclayabout 13 inchesthick. Thesubstratumislight yellowishbrownmudstonetoadepthof 60inchesand more. These soils are typically neutral intheupper part of thesurfacelayer andmoderatelyalkaline below. Permeability is slow. High shrinking and swelling is probably duringdehydration/rehydrationcycles. Satelliteimageryindicatesareaswiththesesoil typesonpropertythat havealreadyseensubstantialerosionissues, specificallyintertiaryvalleysonthesteepersidesof themainridgewhererunoff fromtheorchardandaccessroadsbecomeschannelizedasitmakesits way down to the secondary valleys bordering the property. Diablo clay soils are well-suited for the cultivation of fruit and nut trees, perennial grasses forgrazing livestock, or most ideally, agroforestry systems that combine both. Zaca clay soilsApproximately one-tenth of the property (the western-most portions above Greenwell Road)consistsof Zacaclaysoils, formedinmaterial weatheredfromcalcareousshaleandmudstone. Inarepresentativeprofile, thesurfacelayer isdarkgrayandverydarkgrayclayabout 39inchesthick.Thenext layer isgrayclayabout 9inchesthick. Thesubstratumissoft marlymudstone. Thesoilsare moderately alkaline and calcareous (containing significant levels of calcium carbonate) 15 https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_MANUSCRIPTS/california/CA673/0/ca_SB_Coastal.pdf 347 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 36 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road throughout. Runoff is mediumand permeability is slow. These soils are prone to erosionwhenvegetative coverage is removed and surface flow is channelized. Soil Infiltration RateAn infiltration tests was performed on the spine of the main ridge to get anestimateof thesoilsinfiltration rate at that location. The number of seconds were measured for 1 quart of water toinfiltrateintoa80.5sqinareaofsoil, andthatinfiltrationratewasextrapolatedoverthelargerareathistest siterepresented. Thedatagatheredfromthistest issummarizedinTable1.5.3. Additionalinfiltration tests would need to be performed as part of any extensive earthworks planning. Itshouldbenotedthat whilethemeasuredinfiltrationratewasveryhigh, thewaterstorageprofileofthesoilsonsitearerelativelylow, andlower stillduetotheirdegradedstate. Soilsaturationcanbereachedveryquickly, further underscoringtheneedfor property-widesoilandwatermanagementthat maintains dispersed flows and increases soil water holding capacity. Table 1.5.2Infiltration test results for orchard ridge top at 370 Ortega Ridge Road. Infiltration TestLocation TimeElapsed(sec) Infiltration Rate(gal/sq.ft./min)Standing Water InfiltrationRate (in/min)StandingWater Infiltration PerAcre Per Min(gal/acre/min)Standing Water Infiltration PerAcre Per Hour(gal/acre/hr)Standing Water Below HeloPad 75 s / qt 5.72 9.18 249,347 14,960,831 Existing Plant CommunitiesThe Coastal Sage Scrub plant community of California exists along the coast from about SanFrancisco, and Lafayette down through about San Diego (San Diego has its own Baja flavor) andinland as far as Riverside in southern California. In some places like north Malibu it is missingentirely, replaced by Chaparral, or in parts of the Big Sur coast, Mixed Evergreen Forest. It issometimescalledSoft Chaparral. SomecommonplantscanincludeCaliforniaSagebrush(Artemisiacalifornica), Cliff Buckwheat or California Buckwheat (Eriogonum parvifolium or Eriogonumfasciculatum), California Aster (Corethrogyne filaginifolia), Golden Bush (Isocoma menziesii),CoyoteBrush(Baccharispilularis), Encelia(Enceliacalifornica), Black, Purple, orWhiteSage(Salviamellifera, S. leucophylla, or S. apiana), Fuchsia-Flowered Gooseberry (Ribes speciosum), andMonkey flower (Mimulus aurantiacus). Existing native and naturalized vegetation can reveal a great deal of diagnostic, historical andclimatological information about a landscape. Thetypeandquantityof speciespresent, aswell astheir patterningacrossthelandscape, canreveal helpful informationregardingthecurrentstateofsoil healthandfertility, landusehistory, pH, andclimate. Basedonwhat isobservedtobegrowingwell on-site, climate analogueprofilescanbecreatedtohelpidentifyuseful treesandplantsfromother locales that should do well at 370 Ortega Ridge Rd. 357 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 46 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road terminating in ten foothill reservoirs. Solving the water problemencouraged new growth; newgrowth required additional water, and the water problem arose again. 457 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 47 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road 2. WaterWater is an essential input for all living organisms on Earth (as far as humans know) - animals,plants, fungi, bacteria, and protists. In some organisms the percentage of body weight made up ofwater exceeds 90%; in humans, this number ranges from 60%-75%. A loss of just 4% of a human’stotal body water leads to dehydration, and alossof 15%can be fatal. Likewise, a human can survivebeyond a month without food, but wouldn’t survive 3 days without water. 19 Why is water so essential to life? Water serves a number of essential functions for living organisms,including: ● A building medium and lubricant for cells, the DNA and proteins within them, and themembranes that surround them;● A solvent, dissolving food into the nutrients needed for cellular metabolic processes;● A vehicle, transporting those nutrients to cells throughout the body for those metabolicprocesses and removing wastes;● A temperature buffer for cells and the bodies that contain them (through sweating andrespiration in animals, transpiration in plants);● An electrical conductor and battery, moving and separating charge throughout a living cellas it metabolizes food and performs its essential functions ; 20 ● A recorder, transmitter and imprinter of molecular and vibratory information. This information alone makes water the most necessary of homestead requirements, however,water also has properties that make it well-suited in providing for a number of other functions,including moving things, moderating climate, and recreation. The water used on most properties for household and landscape is typically piped in fromamunicipal water company or pumped from a drilled well. While, for many landowners, theday-to-day consistency of these sources provide a convincing case for water security, others arequickly realizing the hard way that these water sources are not as secure as once thought.Landownersonamunicipalwatersupplyaresubjecttothepricingandwhimsoftheutility, whichissubject tothewhimsofthepoliticians, specialinterestlobbies, theenvironment, electricalgrid, andwater supply. Well owners are also subject to the whims of the electrical grid (or solar/windsystems) – but additionally, in many areas ownersarecomingtofindtheir flowratedroppingoreven disappearing altogether as underground aquifers are depleted. Theseissuesspeaktothecriticalneedforlandownerstoworkwithwaterandembraceitspresenceon-site- andbeyondthat, toactivelytendtothehydrologicalhealthofthewatershedinwhichtheirproperty lies. 20 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nSbg3cuZNRQ 19 https://sitn.hms.harvard.edu/uncategorized/2019/biological-roles-of-water-why-is-water-necessary-for-life/ 467 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 48 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road The Four R’s of Regenerative HydrologyThe actions of regenerative hydrology can be expressed in terms of sound fiscal budgetmanagement. The4R’sof awater budget - receive,recharge,retain,andrelease-areequivalenttoincome, deposit, savings, andexpense. Landownersshouldensurethatthewaterbalanceoflocalwatersheds is in the blue and not in thered, that liquidassetscontinuallyproduceahigh-qualityreturn on investment, and re-invest returns back into local watersheds to continue buildingprincipal. Figure 2.0.1The water cycle. Receive = Income Watershedsonlyreceivewaterassnowfall, rainfall, dewcondensationandfogprecipitation. Annualprecipitation is the only true source of income tore-supplyaproperty’swater budget allowance.Everything else (drafting fossil aquifers, importing from other areas) is drawing down on principal. Regenerative hydrology advocates the adaptive management of watershed lands to optimizerehydration by promotinglandusepatternsthat enhancethereceptivecapacityof awatershedintimes of excess and the retentive capacity in times of drought. 477 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 49 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road Recharge = Deposit Rechargeprocessesarecritical forthelandscapetoannuallyrefreshitselfviathedepositslipcalledinfiltration. The capacity to make water deposits depends on the watershed’s recharge potential.Precipitation received by the watershed must percolate and be absorbed, or else there is noreplenishment of the water savings account. Rechargepotentialandfunctionsareimpairedbythehardeningandpavingoverofnaturalrechargeareas, thedisconnectionof riversfromtheir floodplains, thedeforestationofnativevegetation, andthe draining of wetlands. Retention = Savings The retention of recharged precipitation is like a savings account asset that yields interest. Thestorage of water is often the most challenging aspect of water supplymanagement. Regenerativehydrologystrategiesshouldappropriatelyslowwater down, increasingtheresidencetimeofwaterstorage in our watersheds. This will optimize the amount of water available for local expensebyliving processes. A landowner (and their surrounding community) is wise to avoid overdrafting of their localwatersheds. To be in the blue, a healthy albeit challenging goal is to never extract out of storage(groundwater) inamountsgreater thanwhat isannuallyreceivedandrecharged. Whilethiscangoon for a while, eventually a penalty must be paid. In situations wherethisiscurrentlyoccurring,landowners cantakestepstomendthebrokenhydrological cycletoensurethat asmuchwater aspossible is being returned and put to highest use in the landscape before it leaves. Release = Expenditure Ideally, expenditureof water assetswillgotofurtherincreasethereception, rechargeandretentioncapacities (the first 3 R’s) of the watershed. Water is released naturally to the ocean, land and atmosphere in a process known as the watercycle. Through seasonal snowand ice melts, groundwater springsandseeps, water isreturnedtocreeksandrivers. Solar evaporationandtheevapo-transpirationof plantshelptoformnewcloudsandfeedthecycleanew. Theinfinitenatureof thiscycleistocontinuallyflowandbeinfluxastheexpense of one stage produces income for the next. Common modern development and land management practices (creating impervious surfaces,channelizingstormwater, poorly-managedanimalgrazing, etc.)tendtoincreasetherateandvolumeof stormwater’s return to the ocean via excessive runoff and heightened flood discharges. Thisdirectly reduces the landscape’s ability to retain water and diminishes the amount of wateravailable for later release during the dry season when it is most needed. 487 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 50 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road 2.1 Providing HydrationPlantshydratethemselvesprimarilythroughtheir rootsandassociatedsymbioseswithfungiinthesoil, whileanimalshydratethemselvesbydrinkingwater directlyandthroughtheconsumptionofplantsandotherlivingorganisms. Thus, somekeydesigngoalsforwateronourhomesteadsshouldbetoensurethatoursoilsandlocalatmosphereareproperlyhydratedandwehavesecureaccesstodrinking water. This report classifies water elements that provide hydration to plantsandanimalsintotwomaincategories: passive water harvesting systems and active water harvesting systems. ● PassiveWaterHarvestingSystems- Passivewater harvestingworksbyshapingtheearthto slow the velocity of runoff, infiltrate it into the soil, and direct it to where it can bebeneficially used by vegetation. Passive water harvesting features include elementsdesigned to infiltrate water into the soil such as swales and berms, infiltration basins,keylinesystems, aswell asopenwater bodiessuchas springs, creeks, rivers, pools, ponds,and lakes. They are typically less expensive, simpler to build, lower maintenance, andlonger lasting than active water harvesting systems.● Active Water Harvesting Systems - Active water harvesting uses rain barrels, cisterns,pools and other types of containers (including earthen ones) to store rainwater for laterdistribution. The stored water can be used outdoors to irrigate vegetation or indoors fornon-potable (toilet flushing, laundry washing) and potable (with proper filtration anddisinfection) uses. Active water harvesting systems can “extend” the rainfall season andmaximizetheuseof collectedwater, but arealsosignificantlymoreexpensivethanpassivesystems. Existing ConditionsExisting water elements that are providing hydration to plants and animals at the site include: ● Water for domestic and irrigation needs is currently provided by the Montecito WaterDistrict, which is supplied at Ortega Road and piped to various end-uses around theproperty. Waterconsumptioniscurrentlybilledintheagriculturaltierat$0.00760/gal. Thefuture reliability and costs of Montecito Water District’ssupplyareunknown, andthesitecurrently lacks private access to water in the form of a spring or well. ○ The existing irrigation systems are entirely manual at this time based on reportsfrom the owners on their discussion with the ranch manager. ● Of the 40 million gallons of water that lands on and runs onto the property during anaverage rain year, anestimated8-20milliongallons(20-50%) islost asrunoff. Thisrunoffcollects and ultimately exits the property boundariesviatheculvertsalongGreenwell Aveand the drainage running alongandoutsideof theNEpropertyboundary, asillustratedinFigure 2.1.1. At the Montecito Water District’s current agricultural water rate of497 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 58 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road ● The Pacific Ocean is .75 miles distant from the property, and exerts a significantlymoderating climate effect on the site.● A swimming pool located to the north of the Main Residence likely provides some localclimate moderation, though it is likely negated bythethermal massof theconcreteinthevicinity. RecommendationsWater elements for moderating climate that should be considered as part of a whole-site designprocess include: ● Conversion of the concrete hardscape area surrounding the swimming pool to thatcharacteristic of a natural-style swimming pool, with softscape and living systems.Replacing theconcretesurroundingtheswimmingpool withplants, beachsand, andothersoftscape and biological elements will significantly improve the local climate moderationprovidedbythepoolwater. Thisshouldbeconsideredaspartofawhole-poolretrofittothatof a natural-style swimming pool, discussed further in section2.4 - Providing Re-Creation. 2.4 Providing Re-CreationThebenefitsofwaterrecreationarenotalwaysreadilyapparent, noreasilymeasured. Thetimeandenergyspent installingawater tankhasthetangiblebenefit of storedwater for useatalatertime.In contrast, a day of immersion in a pool providesnothinginhand, but, instead, offersrefreshingexperiences and pleasant memories. This, however, isthepurposeof recreation: tore-createor torenew. Fortunately, water elements that provide for recreation also provide for at least one of theotherfunctionsalreadydescribedinthisreport - hydration, themovement ofthings, andthemoderationof climate - and often multiple. This section describes those water elements at the site that provide for recreation. Existing Conditions● There is a pool located on the north side of the Main Residence. RecommendationsWater elementsfor providingrecreationtoresidentsandgueststhatcouldbeconsideredaspartofa whole-site design process include: ● Conversion of the swimming pool to that of a natural-style swimming pool. Naturalswimming pools, like the one shown in Figure 2.4.1 (designed and built by David PaganButler), aregaininginpopularityasawarenesscontinuestogrowaboutthenegativehealthconsequencesof swimminginchlorinatedor otherwisesterilizedwater. Naturalswimmingpools mimic the water filtration and purification processes found in nature while alsoprovidingadedicatedswimzone. Theycancomeinmanydifferentshapesandforms, butallutilizeriparianplantingstofilterandpurifythewateranddecreaseavailablenutrientlevels 577 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 59 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road to maintain clarity. Many also utilize very quiet (when compared to conventional poolpumps) air lift pumps - essentially air stones set inside vertically arranged pipes - to liftwater whilesimultaneouslyaeratingit (goodfor plantsanddesiredaquaticcreatures) andpulling it throughtheestablishedroot net of theriparianplantings. Air lift pumpshavenomoving parts (only bubbles!) and are so gentle that frogs and fish can pass throughunharmed, unlike typical submersible pumps. Figure 2.4.1One of David Pagan Butler’s natural swimming pools in the UK. 587 th Generation Design

===== PAGE 60 =====
Level 1: Site Assessment - 370 Ortega Ridge Road 3. AccessAccess is howhumans and animals get in and around asite, particularlyinrelationtowater andactivity patterns. Access can often bearestrictingfactor whenselectingappropriatemanagementstrategies. Additionally, access routespresent hugeopportunitiesfor passivewater harvestingon-and off-property. While access routes, especially roads, are costly to create or modify, awell-designed and placed access route can result in lower long-term maintenance costs, andefficient movement of people, animals, andmaterialsaroundaproperty–whileapoorlydesignedaccessroutecanleadtohugeerosionissues, extensivemaintenancecosts(untiltherouteultimatelybecomes infeasible to maintainandaccessislost), thesacrificeof water harvestingopportunities,and unnecessarily spent energy in trying to move about the property. Sitetopographyanditsresultant influenceonthemovementofwaterthroughandwithinthesiteistheprimaryinfluencer ofaccessrouteplacement. Howwaterinteractswithanyaccessroute, beitahard top road or a deer trail, will determine the route’s long termstability and requiredlevel ofmaintenance. The following list summarizes the rules of thumb for good access design: ● Harmonize with the patterns of water already present in the landscape when planning,installing or remodeling access routes. This will always lead to better performance andlower maintenance costs. Good access at minimum maintains watershed function, andideally improves it.● Cross valleys, whenever possible, along dam/pond walls or following contour; traverse alandscape on contour as much as possible; and ascend and descend the landscape alongridge lines (these areas have the least potential to accumulate water in destructivevolumes).● Drain water fromaccess routes as often as possible, and always at first chance and lastchancelocations. Erosiverunoff water shouldbedivertedfromtheaccessroadsasshallow,non-erosive flow using rolling dips, crowning, cut-off drains, and water bars into passivewater harvesting systems such as swales and retention basins.● Maintain access routes regularly - A stitch in time saves nine. For reporting purposes, access routes have been divided into two categories: roads andhuman/animal access paths. 3.1 Wheeled AccessWheeledaccessreferstoanyaccessroutesthat aredesignedandbuilttoaccommodatepeopleandthingsbeingtransportedonwheels(vehicles, heavyequipment, trailers, animal-drawncarts, etc)-typically referred to as roads. Roads typically have a specially prepared surface to designed tosustain wheeled traffic acrossasmuchof theyear aspossible- inurbanandsuburbanareaswithheavy wheeled traffic this surface is usually asphalt or concretelaidonacompactedbasecourse, 597 th Generation Design